so this is in effect a Q&A video about
nihilism and my particular school of a
particular brand of nihilism but I've
kind of agglomerated all the questions
into one so I don't know if you can
relate to this now remember Mike my
girlfriend doesn't represent my
philosophy it's not like when we got
together there was like a requirement
that she had you know believe everything
I'll or anything I believe but if she
converts to Islam I'm breaking up there
you know I mean obviously there are
limits and every every relationship of
how much you've got in common and this
kind of thing but on the on the whole
I've been surprised at how many elements
of my kind of philosophical approach to
life she can really relate to positively
so you know even though it's a simple
example when I was talking about that
issue in in facebook comments of not
having the attitude of wanting to be
right and one through the other other
person well some of those little
elements of nihilism and what it means
to me a price she could relate to right
away she really saw like yeah this is an
important difference been leading a
meaningful life and leading a
meaningless one and the way in which
people's own anyway the people's
ideology that's what it's about you know
escalates conflict and what-have-you I
wasn't able to put my finger on it as
what philosophy but I mean it's in those
little examples that you see you know
the ways in which the critique of belief
matters in everyday life and I think old
philosophy needs to be like that if
you're a member of a philosophy that
doesn't anyway touch your daily life
maybe you're not really uh maybe it's
not really a philosophy and God knows
I've known a lot of people with PhDs who
are in that situation where they
identify with neo-kantian ISM or
something we ask them ok how does that
actually change for what I was x-ray fit
anyway not at all it's just just an
academic topic that they that they study
so kind of combining all the questions I
got into one a lot of them boiled down
to this I got this you know people have
different ways to send me messages on
patreon etc etc but they can be combined
to boil down to saying do you really
believe that the world would be a better
place if nihilists were the majori
if nihilist were in charge or if not
less if everyone wasn't I unless of
course you know impossible and with
reference to some specific situation so
in some cases it was like well do you
really think there wouldn't have been as
many massacres in the history of Russia
if the nihilists had kind of won instead
of the Communist cause nihilism is a
historically existing real ideology in
the history of Russia especially in the
years leading up to 1917 what's called
Russian nihilism as a school of thought
you know do you think the world would be
a loss of own place so team to step back
here I think this is look to be a vegan
I very often use this really minimal
down-to-earth definition of veganism
right where I say look I'm getting rid
of kind of the grandiose ideological
claims but I do think it's inevitable
that if you are a vegan you believe the
world would be a better place if more
people were vegan right I think I think
you know if you kind of get past the
I don't know of any vegan if
you are vegan it's not just a diet
I think another element you know is that
you you believe to go now atheism
likewise I mean people criticize atheism
say atheism is really a religion
obviously atheism is not a religion
however if you're keeping it all the way
real don't you think that atheists in
their heart of hearts believe that the
world would be a better place if more
people were yes and the stiff so fact
though fewer people were Muslim and
fewer people were questioned and Jewish
and what-have-you you know and if you
don't believe that I think it's worth
questioning are you really an atheist
like how can you believe a theism is
just good for me and isn't good for the
masses or millions of people or sadly
thousands of people you know how could I
possibly believe veganism is just good
for me like I some kind of private
virtue and not good for millions of
people and the third example skepticism
skepticism with a capital S if you
really think about the ancient Greek
meaningful use of the word skepticism
not read it scepticism not internet
skepticism you know what I mean but real
skepticism likewise you know I think if
you're a skeptic it's not possible that
you think
it's good for me but no the world like
the world to be a worse place if more
people were skeptical I think it's
completely inevitable that if you really
understand skepticism you value that
you're only you know that you're gonna
say yeah the world would be a better
place if more people together so the
bridge I want to make yours is this it
struck me the other day and I never
thought this before that in many ways
the relationship between atheism and
nihilism is parallel to the relationship
between vegetarianism and veganism you
know now sorry I'm vegan it's very easy
for me to see that vegetarians are
trying to do something positive they're
trying to make the world a better place
but vegetarianism when you really think
about it really live with it really look
at the inputs and outputs its incoherent
it does not make sense it does not make
sense to pay someone money to raise a
cow in captivity and take its milk and
turn the milk into cheese and then kill
the cow and constantly impregnate the
cow and kill any of its babies so that
vegetarians can eat cheese it's morally
incoherent it's ecologically incoherent
it's athlete this doesn't make sense
however I totally can recognize they're
doing something they're trying to do
something positive by becoming
vegetarian and veganism by contrast is
coherent and it's just you know I feel
it makes sense it completes an impulse
that's there in a partial and incoherent
way in in vegetarianism in the same
sense I really regard atheism as
inadequate although it's they're trying
to do something good I mean II theism
all it is is a rejection of monotheism
and polytheism that's it that's all it
covers so it's very problematic I
complained about this recently in some
videos of meditation if you search this
channel for the word meditation there
are a whole bunch of videos talking
about Buddhist meditation but you know
it really kind of astounds me that you
can go to these skeptic forums an
atheist forms the internet they're these
people they really identify with atheism
or they really identify with skepticism
but they still believe in
we believe in Supernatural ideas about
meditation right and sometimes it's
supernatural ideas disguised as as
pseudoscience sometimes not all right
the meditation is one example homeopathy
magical heal you can be an atheist to
believe in ho me out that you believe in
healing crystals you can believe in all
kinds of alternative medicine being you
probably know people like this I've seen
it all over the internet and so on
right um and the big one in my life and
this is still a big deal in many parts
of the world today but it's a big deal
in Cambridge England you know I used to
live in Cambridge England with the big
University there and so on you can meet
people or atheists and they support
communism and I don't mean softcore
communism they support mass murder like
this regimes I've seen the whole range
of course they're atheists are kind of
softcore communists who'd rather not see
people so I've met believe me I've met
many many communists who still to this
day support the policies of Joseph
Stalin still support mass murder and so
on it's not this you know this was a
mainstream ideology until only so many
years ago so obviously atheism in itself
from my perspective is inadequate and
incoherent and I really can say that
skepticism is in a sense the the sequel
of that that completes a something
that's not fully thought out and not
fully coherent
within within just a theism and I think
it's the same thing again in parallel
but I'm off to repeat myself I think I
can say the same thing again with with
skepticism whether you're talking about
kind of phony internet skepticism or if
you're talking about you know a really
meaningful ancient Greek notion of what
skepticism is what it's supposed to be
about because again you can be a skeptic
and have all these other problems I
think I mean out maybe I'm simplifying I
think there are some people who would
argue that skepticism is almost
tantamount to nihilism that if you're
really a thorough and consistent skeptic
that it brings you up pretty close to
nihilism Messiah I said to find it that
might be an interesting conversation
have I ever met anyone who represented
ancient Greek skepticism but anyway it
seems to be it seems to be a moot point
you know but again I think scepticism
alone where does that leave you and
to communism or I will hope I'd hope any
skeptic would reject homeopathy but
that's not my experience my experience
is people who embrace skepticism but who
really believe in for example
Transcendental Meditation
so III don't know how they square that
circle but if you're a nihilist you
definitely do not even settle meditation
and then this kind of thing right so
look I mean you know I've said most what
I have to say in this video this is
short by my standards this video I said
recently had a lot of reflections of the
importance of sticking to historical
reality rather than the principle of the
thing so I'm asked this kind of question
do I really think there will be a better
place till really there be fewer
massacres if more people were in ILS we
can definitely say in terms of comparing
historical reality to historical reality
the historical reality of who who were
the Russian nihilists that was a real
political movement that really is a real
charitable movement and so on they were
interested in improving the lives of
farmers and so on well if the the
Russian nihilists had been in control of
Russia in the year 1917 instead of the
Communist Party and I shouldn't even say
communist instead of the Bolshevik Party
specifically Lenin's Bolshevik Party
which is very different from other forms
of communism I can guarantee you that
after the elections of 1917 there were
elections in 1917 and Lenin lost the
party that won was a different left-wing
party called the social social
Revolutionary Party sure if if nihilus
have been in power they would not have
responded to the elections by hunting
down and murdering every elected member
of parliament and going from town to
town and village to village and hunting
down and murdering anyone who supported
the winning political party in those
elections that is completely
inconceivable so not comparing ideals to
ideals or not comparing an ideal to a to
a lack of ideals but if you look at the
historical reality of who the the
Russian nihilists were and the direct
alternative to them in Lenin's Bolshevik
form of communism
yes it's very easy for me to
the world would be a better place if if
nihilist had political power at that
time and obviously they would have
passed on political power to whoever won
the elections you know we're not
imagining a nihilist spectatorship it
doesn't doesn't make any sense or
possibly a parliament in which the
nihilists won two seats there's a little
tiny minority probably nihilism is not a
very popular ideology and I think most
people accept it's it's never gonna be
it's almost by definition it's the
perpetual outsider it's you know though
it's always gonna be a gadfly and a
critic in that Socratic sense of gadfly
in relation to mainstream my believes
but if you believe in atheism if you
believe in skepticism just like if you
believe in veganism is it possible for
you to think that Saudi Arabia would be
a worse country if it were ruled by
atheists do you believe Saudi Arabia
would be a worst country if it were
ruled by skeptics or in my case by
nihilists I find that impossible you
know III don't in a sense I don't know
how it can be coherent to be an atheist
and not believe that Saudi Arabia would
be improved by by atheism you know any
any clear clear-cut case like that and
you know you could look at other more
difficult situations we have multiple
religions look right now in Nigeria you
know there's an ongoing war against
Muslim extremists like Boko Haram in
Nigeria if you don't think that you know
atheism is better then again atheism or
skepticism or nihilism wherever you kind
of are on this perspective is better
than Boko Haram and is better than the
various forms of Christianity and
animism and superstition that are
competing with Islam in northern Nigeria
I don't know what
what kind of estar or how it's possible
for you to live with such a fundamental
contradiction within your your
fundamental conditions